The advantages of TPS are mainly of interest in tropical and subtropical regions of the world. Under these climatic conditions, the production, storage and transportation of potato planting material is difficult. Moreover, potato yields are considerable lower in tropical and subtropical regions of the world than in the Northern Hemisphere, so that about 20 percent of the harvest is needed as planting material. Hence TPS varieties in the tropics can have 20 percent lower yields compared to clonally propagated potato varieties and remain competitive. About 20 TPS varieties have been developed. Most interesting are those varieties developed from recombination of the _andigena_ and _tuberosus_ gene pools. However, the original idea of raising seedlings in nurseries and then planting seedlings into the field is largely supplanted by practice of raising TPS varieties in seedling nurseries to obtain healthy planting material, and then to cultivate these TPS varieties for several growing seasons as a clonally propagated crop. Later, as yield declines are significant due to declining health status, true seed production is requested again.

However, today, not more than 10,000 ha of TPS are grown, mainly in Asia, which trace back to about eight TPS varieties. The future of TPS is debatable. From the breeding perspective, the future of TPS will mainly depend on working with two gene pools, in which a certain extent of inbreeding is applied, with subsequent use of general combining ability to improve these two gene pools.